Proposal to Allow Multiple Reminders/Actors Implementation (#50)
dapr/proposals: 0011-R-multiple_reminders_actors_impl.md

# Allow Multiple Versions of Reminder/Actors Implementation

* Author(s): Deepanshu Agarwal (@DeepanshuA), Alessandro Segala (@ItalyPaleAle)
* State: Ready for Implementation
* Updated: 2023-12-28

## Overview

> As a user, I should be able to use Dapr core functionality of Actors/reminders i.e. leverage Actors/reminders interfaces BUT to be able to implement these interfaces in a new Control Plane service, which as a user, I should be allowed to design as per the way it solves issues for me.

Reviewer: Why all CAPS in BUT?

This is a proposal to allow multiple versions of Reminders/Actors Implementation.

## Background

> Currently, we see multiple issue with Reminders creation/deletion at scale and with placement Service.

Reviewer 2: nit:
```suggestion
Currently, we see multiple issues with Reminders creation/deletion at scale and with placement Service.
```

We should be able to allow users to use core reminders/actors functionality of Dapr runtime; while implementing Reminders/Actors interface in their own way to solve these issues.

This would let users solve reminders/actors issues as per their own requirements and design.
This would also let users design their solution in an independent way.

## Related Items

This has already been discussed in different maintainers meetings, notably in [this issue](https://github.com/dapr/dapr/issues/7203).

## Implementation Details

### Design

> Reminders / Actors should have their Interfaces segregated in such a way that it shuld be possible to implement them in an independent way.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Reminders / Actors should have their Interfaces segregated in such a way that it should be possible to implement them in an independent way.
```

There are two places where APIs or functions required for Actors and Reminders are defined.

1. Protos in dapr/proto package.

2. Interfaces in pkg/actors/internal for placement and reminder.

Out of these 2, protos are not to be updated, as every implementation will have their own RPCs defined accordingly.

Only interfaces in pkg/actors/internal have to be updated. A major work has already been done for them in release 1.12 already by segregating actors, reminders and timers interfaces (https://github.com/dapr/dapr/pull/6669).

```go

// PlacementService allows for interacting with the actor placement service.
type PlacementService interface {
	io.Closer

> 	Start(context.Context) error

Reviewer 3: This API seems to be biased towards an alternative implementation. Is there a way to show how the existing placement service will work with this interface? Is there a way to elevate the abstraction to a small set of methods:
- Start()
- WaitUntilReady()
- Lookup()
- RegisterActorType()

Or clarify what each of the other methods are needed for. If the interface is simply an union of the methods of each possible implementation, then the interface is not abstracting them properly and each vendor will need to add to this list of methods.

Author: These interfaces are taken as it is directly from current dapr/dapr master.
Existing placement client works with this interface.
There are two methods which are not used right now: ReportActorDeactivation and HaltActorFn, but they are useful when actors lifecycle information needs to be updated in Placement service, if it maintains them.

I have added comments with these APIs.

	WaitUntilReady(ctx context.Context) error
	LookupActor(ctx context.Context, req LookupActorRequest) (LookupActorResponse, error)
	AddHostedActorType(actorType string, idleTimeout time.Duration) error
	ReportActorDeactivation(ctx context.Context, actorType, actorID string) error

	SetHaltActorFns(haltFn HaltActorFn, haltAllFn HaltAllActorsFn)
	SetOnAPILevelUpdate(fn func(apiLevel uint32))

	// PlacementHealthy returns true if the placement service is healthy.
	PlacementHealthy() bool
	// StatusMessage returns a custom status message.
	StatusMessage() string
}

```

```go
type RemindersProvider interface {
	io.Closer

	Init(ctx context.Context) error
	GetReminder(ctx context.Context, req *GetReminderRequest) (*Reminder, error)
	CreateReminder(ctx context.Context, req *Reminder) error
	DeleteReminder(ctx context.Context, req DeleteReminderRequest) error
	DrainRebalancedReminders(actorType string, actorID string)
	OnPlacementTablesUpdated(ctx context.Context)

> 	SetResiliencyProvider(resiliency resiliency.Provider)

Reviewer 3: Can't resiliency be offered at the layer above this interface?

Author: Just noticed, this was removed already from dapr/dapr master interface. I have removed from here too.

	SetExecuteReminderFn(fn ExecuteReminderFn)
	SetStateStoreProviderFn(fn StateStoreProviderFn)
	SetLookupActorFn(fn LookupActorFn)
}

```
Idea behind this is that interfaces defined in pkg/actors/internal will be used to form a Building Block / Client which will implement all these methods defined in these interfaces.

Whereas, methods defined for Services in protos will be implemented by respective new/existing Control Plane Service(s).

And, the methods from these clients will call methods of the servers, wherever required.

![actors_reminders](./resources/0011-R-multiple_reminders_actors_impl/Actors_Reminders_Interface.png)

> Depending on the implementation, it can be decided that what all RPCs need to be defined for a Service. Example, for a Placement Service which just creates and pushes Actor Types v/s Dapr Hosts table information to All sidecars, only table related ReportDaprStatusneeds to be as rpc.

Reviewer 2: Can you clarify what is meant by `v/s`, is that meant as versus? Either way I am not sure I understand your example sentence. Can you reword this sentence to be clearer?

```suggestion
Depending on the implementation, it can be decided that all RPCs need to be defined for a Service. For example, for the Placement Service which creates and pushes Actor Types v/s Dapr Hosts table information to all sidecars, only table related ReportDaprStatus needs to be an rpc.
```

> Whereas, for a Service, where Actor information is Pulled by sidecars from Actors Service needs some methods like LookupActor or ReportActorDeactivation, which thus form a part of RPCs.

Reviewer 2: When you say for `a service`, do you mean _any_ control plane service? Or like any service a user creates for their own separate control plane service needs?
```suggestion
Whereas, for a Service, where Actor information is pulled by sidecars from the Actors Service, it only needs some methods like LookupActor or ReportActorDeactivation, which thus form a part, or subset, of the RPCs.
```

> For some minor changes left in interfaces,  has been raised (https://github.com/dapr/dapr/pull/7281).

Reviewer 2: I think its worth elaborating on what changes the PR made if you are linking to it. It reads better if explained.
```suggestion
Standardization efforts have been made for the actor services, namely placement and reminders in [this PR](https://github.com/dapr/dapr/pull/7281).
```

## How to build and deploy Actors/Scheduler/Placement Service?

There are two sub-systems that we are dealing with here: Actors and Reminders. And, as we know, going forward, there can be multiple variants of Services providing either of these sub-systems or both.

There will be multiple possibilities, like:

1. Placement Service used for Actors and Distributed Scheduler used for Reminders.

2. ABC Service used for both Actors and Reminders.

3. XYZ used for Actors and Distributed Scheduler used for Reminders.

So, how to decide what all to deploy in what case for user?

### Steps:

1. Dapr Configuration changes to depict what services to load for Control Plane and what not.

> 2. Component loading capability, specifically by operator, for Control Plane. This is required, in case CP requires a component to be loaded.

Reviewer 2: What if the control plane does not require a component? Will this break anything if the control plane doesn't have a component required? Specifically, I am asking since the distributed scheduler proposal does not include a component in the design, and I want to ensure this is not a requirement and will not break things.

Author: Yeah, it won't break anything. That remains completely ok to not require a component by a CP Service.

#### Step 1: Configuration changes:

> A) Changes in charts/dapr/charts/dapr_config/templates/dapr_default_config.yaml

Reviewer 3: I don't think a vendor's implementation should impact the OSS Chart. It is the vendor's responsibility to provide the Chart for their own services. Otherwise, each vendor will need to PR against the OSS for any specific of their custom implementation.

Author: Yeah, it is not affected. I will remove it from list of updates. https://github.com/dapr/dapr/pull/7318 doesn't add any such change.

##### CLI flags and annotations:

* Injector is configured (via env vars set by Helm) with what actor and/or reminders service to use. Default value is to use placement and no reminders service (so it uses built-in reminders). It is possible to set in the Helm chart values to use different reminders and/or placement services.

For reminders:

* Default is to set nothing in the CLI, which means use the built-in reminders (that use state stores)
* If in the Helm chart the injector is configured with a reminders service, then it adds the CLI flag `--reminders-service <name>:<address>`, for example `--reminders-service scheduler:k8s-svc-name.svc.cluster.local:port` (the `<name>` part tells daprd which implementation to load)

For placement:

* If the user has set the `dapr.io/placement-host-address` annotation, that forces the injector to set `--placement-host-address` to the value passed, as is the case today
* Otherwise, if there's no explicit dapr.io/placement-host-address annotation:
    * If the configuration (via Helm) is to use placement, then sets `--placement-host-address` exactly as today (this is default value)

>     * If the configuration is to use another actors service, it sets `--actors-service <name>:<address>:<port>` following the same logic as the reminders svc)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    * If the configuration is to use another actors service, it sets `--actors-service <name>:<address>:<port>` following the same logic as the reminders service)
```

This is backwards-compatible.

> Note: Exception is thrown when `--actors-service` or `--reminders-service` are set, if the injector is trying to inject a sidecar that use an oldeer version of Dapr, daprd that will crash because the flag doesn't exist. This is a "feature": if the cluster wants to use a different actors/reminders service, versions of Dapr that don't support that should crash.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Note: Exception is thrown when `--actors-service` or `--reminders-service` are set, if the injector is trying to inject a sidecar that use an older version of Dapr, daprd that will crash because the flag doesn't exist. This is a "feature": if the cluster wants to use a different actors/reminders service, versions of Dapr that don't support that should crash.
```

(https://github.com/dapr/dapr/pull/7318)

#### Step 2: Component Loading:

> This Control Plane Service may require some component, like a database etc. which it should be able to load, using Operator. But, components visible to a Control Plane service should not be visible to Daprd sidecar and vice-versa.

Reviewer 2: I assume nothing will break if a component is _not_ required?

Hence, just a logical grouping is required.

> (https://github.com/dapr/dapr/pull/7314)

Reviewer 4: @DeepanshuA Can you add more details for this?
